Document how to use uenvs as upstream Spack instances (#99)
eth-cscs/alps-uenv: docs/uenv-compilation-spack.md

# Using uenvs as upstream Spack instances

> User-environments (uenvs) are built with [Spack] using the [Stackinator] tool. Therefore, an `uenv` is tightly copuled with [Spack] and can be used as an upstream [Spack] instance (see [Chaining Spack Installations] for more details).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
User-environments (uenvs) are built with [Spack] using the [Stackinator] tool. Therefore, a `uenv` is tightly coupled with [Spack] and can be used as an upstream [Spack] instance (see [Chaining Spack Installations] for more details).
```

General question which doesn't need to be answered here: Is there a distinction between
- user-environment
- uenv
- `uenv`

?

Naively I'd say the first is a generic term, same as user environment. uenv: project name or a squashfs image? `uenv`: name of the command line tool?

!!! note
    While this guide tries to explain everything step-by-step, it might be difficult to follow without any knowledge of [Spack]. Please have a look at [Spack Basic Usage] for a short introduction to [Spack].

The uenv of a supported application contains all the dependencies to build the software with a particular configuration. In [Spack], such configuration is defined by a [spec] (see [Spack Basic Usage] for more details). Most uenvs already provide modules or [Spack Filesystem Views] which allow to manually build the same configuration. However, it is possible that you want to build or develop an application with a different configuration. To avoid re-building the whole uenv, you can re-use what is already there and build your new configuration using [Spack]. 

This guide explains a _developer workflow_ allowing to either build your own package with [Spack], or use [Spack] to build all the dependencies and provide a build environment for the package.

!!! note
    This guide assumes that you have a local installation of [Spack]. If you don't have [Spack] installed, follow [Spack Getting Started].

!!! warning

>     Avoid installing [Spack] on `HOME`. Packages are installaed within the `spack/` folder, and you might quickly run out of space.

Reviewer 2: A note about compatible spack versions might be useful. Most of our current envs have been built with spack v0.21.2, which won't work as upstream if used with spack@develop.

Author: Great point!

>     Avoid installing [Spack] on `HOME`. Packages are installaed within the `spack/` folder, and you might quickly run out of space.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Avoid installing [Spack] on `HOME`. Packages are installed within the `spack/` folder, and you might quickly run out of space.
```

>     Avoid installing [Spack] on `HOME`. Packages are installaed within the `spack/` folder, and you might quickly run out of space.

Reviewer: The eternal question: do we already know where spack should be installed by users, instead of saying "don't use home"? This is not a blocking comment. We might have to live with this until we know better.

Author: @simonpintarelli suggested `$SCRATCH` in #92. Should we go for that for the time being, and then update the documentation when there is a final decision?

```
cp2k@2024.1 +cuda cuda_arch=80
```

This [spec] defines a build of [CP2K] version `2024.1` with CUDA acceleration. All other dependencies and features are defined by the default values in the [CP2K Spack package].

## Set uenv as upstream Spack instance

Activate the uenv. Here we assume the uenv described above is called `cp2k/2024.1` and it is already deployed:

```bash
uenv image pull cp2k/2024.1
uenv start cp2k/2024.1
```

With the uenv active, we can now tell our local [Spack] instance to use the uenv as an upstream [Spack] instance (see [Chaining Spack Installations] for more details):

```bash
export SPACK_SYSTEM_CONFIG_PATH=/user-environment/config/
```

!!! note
    We assumed here that the uenv is mounted in the standard location `/user-environment/`. If it is mounted in a non-standard location, adjust the previous command accordingly.

## Building your own version 

Let's assume we want to have a version of [CP2K] what uses the COSMA library for communication-optimal matrix multiplication with GPU-aware MPI:

```
cp2k@2024.1 +cuda cuda_arch=80 +cosma ^cosma +gpu_direct
```

> COSMA is not availabe in the uenv described above since it is not a dependency needed by `cp2k@2024.1 +cuda cuda_arch=80`. 

Reviewer 2: It might be worth mentioning here that in general it is `cuda_arch=90`, otherwise people might copy/paste the wrong arch.

Author: Yeah, I realized too late this is an annoying one... `cp2k@2024.1` can't be build with `cuda_arch=90`. Maybe worth using a different example (like SIRIUS) where we can actually use `cuda_arch=90`?

Reviewer 2: Yes, or QuantumESPRESSO%nvhpc.

Or adding `packages:all:prefer:cuda_arch=90`, but then set it explicitly to 80 in the spec and explain why.

Reviewer 2: For QE I've added the spack upstream example in the PR: https://github.com/eth-cscs/alps-uenv/pull/92
But it's not as well explained as you did.

Author: Thanks for pointing it out, I missed it. Having it in a central location would avoid repetition, since it's useful for many uenvs. I'll look at what you wrote already, and incorporate it with this PR. I'll switch package too, to avoid confusion.

> Or adding packages:all:prefer:cuda_arch=90, but then set it explicitly to 80 in the spec and explain why.

This is what I did for the recipe, but is an additional layer of information that a general user does not need to know about (it's CP2K-specific).

> COSMA is not availabe in the uenv described above since it is not a dependency needed by `cp2k@2024.1 +cuda cuda_arch=80`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
COSMA is not available in the uenv described above since it is not a dependency needed by `cp2k@2024.1 +cuda cuda_arch=80`. 
```

### Spack Environment

> To make things clean and reproducible, we use [Spack Environments] do describe what we want to build. To define a [Spack environment] we create the following file in a folder (hereafter referred to as `SPACK_ENV_FOLDER`):

Reviewer 2: It is missing that the file must be named `spack.yaml`.

What about giving the commands `spack env create`, `spack  -e [..] add <spec>`
`spack config add [..]` to create `spack.yaml`?

Reviewer: In addition to `spack env create <name>`, you can also do `spack -e <name> config edit` to dump the below contents into the file. Not sure which is simpler to grok for someone not used to envs though.

```yaml
spack:
  specs:
  - cp2k@2024.1 +cosma
  packages:
    all:
      prefer:
        - +cuda cuda_arch=80
    cosma:
      require:
        - +gpu_direct
  view: false
  concretizer:
    unify: true
```

`packages:all:prefer` indicates that we want the `+cuda` variant active for all packages that have it. The `require` clause is stronger, and we use it for a specific package, COSMA, to make sure the `+gpu_direct` variant (GPU-aware MPI) is enabled (this is a constraint we want to enforce on the COSMA dependency). 

!!! note
    It is good practice to have a single root [spec] in an environment, and to define constraint on all packages or specific dependencies in the `packages:` field.

### Building

After defining the environment above, we can concretize it:

```bash
spack -e SPACK_ENV_FOLDER concretize -f
```

> The result of the concretization will be printed on screen. Packages starting with `[+]` are packages that will be freshly installed in your local [Spack] instance. Packages marked ad `[e]` (external) are packages taken directly from the uenv (which we are using as upstream [Spack] instance). You should see many packages marked as `[e]`, which are being re-used from the uenv. This will greatly speed up compilation, since [Spack] will have to build only a small subset of packages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The result of the concretization will be printed on screen. Packages starting with `[+]` are packages that will be freshly installed in your local [Spack] instance. Packages marked as `[e]` (external) are packages taken directly from the uenv (which we are using as upstream [Spack] instance). You should see many packages marked as `[e]`, which are being re-used from the uenv. This will greatly speed up compilation, since [Spack] will have to build only a small subset of packages.
```

> The result of the concretization will be printed on screen. Packages starting with `[+]` are packages that will be freshly installed in your local [Spack] instance. Packages marked ad `[e]` (external) are packages taken directly from the uenv (which we are using as upstream [Spack] instance). You should see many packages marked as `[e]`, which are being re-used from the uenv. This will greatly speed up compilation, since [Spack] will have to build only a small subset of packages.

Reviewer: Packages that aren't yet installed have ` - `, while packages that are not external but are already installed have `[+]`. The latter shouldn't show up for someone doing this guide for the first time so it can perhaps be left out, but I don't think it hurts to mention it either.

Author: Yep. It is also `[^]` for upstream packages, not `[e]`, which is for externals. I'll correct and expand.

You can finally build everything in the concretized environment:

```bash
spack -e SPACK_ENV_FOLDER install
```

## Developing with Spack

In addition to wanting to build a different configuration of a package as described above, you might want to build your own software from source. Let's assume we want to develop [CP2K] with the COSMA library as a dependency:

```
cp2k@2024.1 +cuda cuda_arch=80 +cosma ^cosma +gpu_direct
```

We assume again that COSMA is not present in the provided uenv.

### Spack Environment and Building Dependencies

> As described above, you can define a [Spack environment] describing the version of the package you want to build and the contraint on the dependencies. After concretizing the environment with

Reviewer 2: typo: `constraint`

> As described above, you can define a [Spack environment] describing the version of the package you want to build and the contraint on the dependencies. After concretizing the environment with

Author: ```suggestion
As described above, you can define a [Spack environment] describing the version of the package you want to build and the constraint on the dependencies. After concretizing the environment with
```

```bash
spack -e SPACK_ENV_FOLDER concretize -f
```

we can tell [Spack] to only install the dependencies, since we want to build the root [spec] manually:

```bash
spack -e SPACK_ENV_FOLDER install --only=dependencies
```

### Building the root spec manually

Finally, we are ready to build the root [spec] manually. With [Spack] you can get a shell within the build environment as follows:

```bash
spack -e SPACK_ENV_FOLDER build-env cp2k -- bash
```

where `cp2k` denotes the root [spec]. Since there is only one such [spec], there is no need to explicitly write out the version nor the variants.

Within the build environment, the software can be built using the provided build system. CP2K uses CMake, therefore we can simply do the following:

```bash
# In CP2K repository root folder

mkdir build && cd build

cmake \
    -GNinja
    -DCP2K_USE_COSMA=ON \
    -DCP2K_USE_ACCEL=CUDA \
    -DCP2K_WITH_GPU=A100 \
    ..

ninja -j 32
```

## Known Limitations

!!! warning

>     Swapping the upstream [Spack] instance by loading different uenvs might lead to a corruption of the [Spack] database. If this happens, you can uninstall everything from your local [Spack] instance with `spack uninstall --all` and clean up with `spack clean --all`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Swapping the upstream [Spack] instance by loading different uenvs might lead to surprising inconsistencies in the [Spack] database. If this happens, you can uninstall everything from your local [Spack] instance with `spack uninstall --all` and clean up with `spack clean --all`.
```
maybe? This warning should be scary, but "corruption" may be a bit too strong (since `spack reindex` can make it somewhat usable again with a new uenv).

Reviewer 2: I'm wondering if we should add `config:install_tree:root:$spack/<hash of uenv recipe>/opt/spack` to `/user-environment/config.yaml`? Then each uenv would have it's own spack install tree. Or if it's better to let the user manage it consciously by creating different spack clones on scratch (if needed at all).
